---
author: admin
date: '2025-11-22'
published: true
tags:
- Philosphy
title: 'Enlightenment and Sophistry: A Critical Analysis of Plato and Isocrates'
---

Enlightenment and Sophistry: A Critical Analysis of Plato and Isocrates

Concept of Enlightenment and Becoming Enlightened
The concept of enlightenment and the journey from ignorance to knowledge emphasizes the transformative power of gaining new perspectives and expertise. It highlights the difficulty one faces when confronting others who are not aware of the new knowledge. Plato discusses the idea of enlightenment in his work "Allegory of the Cave." He suggests that it may take time for individuals to become accustomed to perceiving higher forms of reality. Initially, they may only be able to discern shadows and reflections, eventually progressing to seeing the actual objects and, ultimately, comprehending celestial bodies and the heavens themselves, finding it easier to perceive the light of the stars and the moon at night than the sun and its light during the day (514b–518d). The concept of enlightenment and the journey from ignorance to knowledge can be compared to learning about a different culture and gaining a new perspective. For example, In the American post-apocalyptic drama series "Fallout" the protagonist, Lucy, who lived her entire life safely in an underground vault during the apocalyptic wasteland, leaves the vault and experiences the outside world and must confront the true nature of reality, mirroring the challenges of accepting new knowledge. Fallout's concept can be compared to someone leaving the military and facing the reality of civilian life. To transition, a service member may have to go to school, earn a degree, adjust to working in corporate life, experience several changes in culture, and become more enlightened. The concept of enlightenment is also relevant to someone pursuing a software development career. A person new to coding and software development may see parallels between not knowing how to code and learning to code and gaining insight into different computer languages and eventually becoming a master, which the experiences can be incredibly eye-opening and enriching. However, some may argue that seeking knowledge can lead to disillusionment and ignorance is bliss, suggesting that with increased knowledge comes the burden of responsibility and awareness of harsh realities, which can be overwhelming and disheartening to people.

Sophistry in Today's Modern World
The critique of sophists can be compared to today's education system, political and social media influencers who claim to be educators, and their misleading promises and their focus on attracting students through exaggerated claims rather than genuine education. In Isocrates' dialogue, he criticizes sophists and those who claim to teach political discourse, stating that they are not interested in the truth but rather in attracting students and benefiting from them, asserting that these individuals promise to make their students clever rhetoricians despite composing worse speeches than laymen. "It would take time for him to get used to seeing higher things. In the beginning, he might only trace the shadows. Then, reflections of people and other things in the water. Next, he would come to see the things themselves. Then he would behold the heavenly bodies and the heaven itself by night, seeing the light 516b of the stars and the moon with greater ease than the sun and its light by day (Isocrates, 1980, p. 9). Plato's dialogue highlights the deceptive nature of sophistry and its impact on individuals' abilities in rhetoric and communication among people who claim their educators. Contradictions between the promises made by sophists and their actual education delivery can be compared with the theme of education and integrity. Many recruiters of for-profit schools and trade schools participate in sophistry, promising excellent education for high cost and delivering poor lectures. I see a lot of politicians on both sides of the political spectrum who engage in sophistry. But they never fulfilled their promises once they got their vote and got into office. Today, influencers and streamers often make grandiose claims or promises to attract attention and followers. Influencers may present themselves as experts in certain lifestyle choices, products, or services, and they often use exaggerated rhetoric or promises to promote these aspects to their audience. While some influencers may genuinely provide valuable content, others may prioritize attracting a large following over-delivering meaningful or truthful information for financial gain from increaseing views. Some individuals may argue that focusing on attracting attention and followers is a natural aspect of the competitive nature of modern communication, marketing, and politics, which is seen as essential for success in these fields, where visibility and engagement are key factors in achieving goals and objectives.

References
Plato. (2016). The allegory of the caveLinks to an external site. (S. Eyer, Trans.).Links to an external site. Translation from Plato's Republic 514b–518d ("Allegory of the Cave"), Harvard University. (Original work published ca. 380 B.C.E.)
Isocrates. (1980). Isocrates with an English translation in three volumes (G. Norlin, Trans.). Harvard University Press; William Heinemann Ltd. (Original work published ca. 370 BCE). Retrieved from https://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0144%3Aspeech%3D13%3Asection%3D15