---
author: Andre Phillips
date: '2025-11-22'
published: true
tags:
- Philosphy
title: 'Crafting an Image: The Intersection of Oratory Skills and Physical Appearance
  in Modern Media'
---

In today's media landscape, superficiality is prioritized over substance, leading to the trivialization of serious issues, and reducing critical matters to mere entertainment. American culture and public discourse are profoundly reflected in entertainment, and this connection serves as a crucial lens through which we can understand the media's influence on societal values and perceptions. As Postman (1986) observes, "Our politics, religion, news, athletics, education, and commerce have been transformed into congenial adjuncts of show business, largely without protest or popular notice. The result is that we are a people on the verge of amusing ourselves to death.". Despite all the critical issues in the world, social media or just surfing the internet for the news seems to give more attention to trivial matters like celebrity issues. It is frustrating seeing attention given to celebrities and then attention to current issues such as climate change, the economy, or war. High-profile celebrity scandals and court cases such as the OJ Simpson case and the Mendez brothers, Johnny Depp, and Puff Daddy played on Netflix overshadow ongoing civil rights issues. In today's media, ads, clickbait headlines, influencers, and reality TV shows overshadow immigration, infrastructure, and inflation issues. Many people may argue that trivial issues distract from everyday life problems and reduce stress, and conversations started by celebrity scandals lead to increased awareness of current societal problems. Instead of evaluating leaders based on their ideas and qualifications, voters may be swayed by superficial qualities.  The emphasis on physical appearance can be problematic, as it shifts the public's attention away from the candidates' policies and capabilities “Although the Constitution does not address the issue, it seems that overweight individuals and those who are bald are effectively excluded from running for high political office. This exclusion also applies to anyone whose appearance is not significantly enhanced by cosmetic products. We may have reached a point where cosmetic appeal has become more important than ideological beliefs for politicians. Journalists, particularly television newscasters, have recognized this trend” (Postman, 1986). During my early military career, I realized the importance of appearance. I questioned why appearance mattered if I was doing the job excellently. I worked my butt off to show I was a good worker, but there were times when my uniform would be trashed from working, and I did not have time to get haircuts from a barber, so I would cut it myself to regulation. When I focused on my appearance, like getting a haircut from a professional versus self-cut hair or where a new clean uniform versus an old uniform that was faded from washing or shining boots as well as staying in shape, my work ethic declined, but I received better marks on evaluations and would argue that’s how I made rank despite having the less work performance The movie "The Campaign" stars Will Ferrell and Zach Galifianakis. Will Ferrell plays an arrogant Democrat who frequently comments on his hair and appearance. Will Ferrell's character is like Governor Newsom and displays how appearance can significantly impact politics. His charisma and attractiveness often eclipse his actual policies. Nevertheless, people will constantly obsess with appearance. In 2014, Barack Obama wore a tan suit while president, which created skepticism in the media, which highlights the media’s focus on appearance versus his actual policies and actions. Critics may argue that appearance is not the main factor, and numerous politicians are not based on looks and have good priorities. The use of entertainers in political rallies and celebrity endorsement. One party campaign had artists such as Megan the Stallion and Gorilla performances to sway voters. The political party also used Beyonce and Taylor Swift to sway voters to vote for their party. Most celebrities do not even have the same financial problems that Americans have, so how can they relate? Politicians increasingly seek celebrity endorsements, leveraging their image to boost their appeal. Some may argue that integrating show business into every day helps keep people's attention and makes it more engaging. Entertainment is taking over public discourse in a broader critique of how various fields have embraced show business elements; the author writes, "Our politics, religion, news, athletics, education, and commerce have been transformed into congenial adjuncts of show business, largely without protest or even much widespread notice. : Information technology training has been transformed into entertainment, such as IP pro TV or YouTube videos, which provide training. Even in today, job market, job searching is a boat, and Pony shows an infographic resume to sway the employer to provide you with an interview. 

Five Parts of Oratory breaks down and emphasizes the essential components of effective communication and public speaking. Understanding the structure or having a template to practice effective communication, such as invention, arrangement, style, memory, and delivery, can be applied today and helps to create persuasive and impactful presentations or speeches. It provides a guide for organizing your thoughts and making it practical to engage with an audience, regardless of the context. By practicing and mastering these elements, anyone can enhance their rhetorical skills, communicate more effectively, and connect more deeply with their listeners. Memory is crucial for retaining and delivering content effectively: "We must also commit to memory the words which we propose to use (Quintilian, trans. 1920, Chapter 3, p. 389)". In the military, to qualify for my submarine warfare pin, you must pass an exam and take a board that asks you questions about your knowledge of how the submarine works. The movie Limitless stars Bradley Cooper, who takes a drug that enhances his memory and becomes intelligent, productive, and an excellent speaker, knowing what to say strictly at the right time. However, some may argue that you sound like a robot when repeating what you have memorized, and if you are experienced, it should roll out naturally. Speech Development through observation: "Just as men discovered the art of medicine by observing that some things were healthy and some the reverse, they observed that some things were helpful and some useless in speaking and noted them for imitation or avoidance. At the same time, they added certain other precepts according to their nature suggested. These observations were confirmed by experience, and each man taught what he knew (Quintilian, trans. 1920, Chapter 3, p. 383).  Watching coding and IT training videos and taking notes on what works. At one time, the artist class was popular. The TV show The Voice. Comedians like Eddie Murphy and many others were influenced by Richard Pryor and used to copy his style. Critics may argue that observing someone else will not improve your speech development and lack originality and creativity. Five Parts of Oratory: "The art of oratory, as taught by most authorities, and those the best, consists of five parts:— invention, arrangement, expression, memory, and delivery or action (the two latter terms being used synonymously) (Quintilian, trans. 1920, Chapter 3, p. 385). " I went to instructor school and learned to be an instructor in the military. Lesson plans in the military had to consist of presentations, lectures, and hands-on assignments videos to cover all types of learners: visual, auditory, and kinesthetic. Some of the best public speakers today are people who do TED talks. TED Talk speakers must have an excellent memory to present political speeches effectively. Critics may argue that mastering oratory can have more parts than 5. Some people may see passion and authenticity better than a planned speech.


References
Thayer, B. (n.d.). Institutio Oratoria by Quintilian, Vol. I. Loeb Classical Library edition, 1920. Retrieved from https://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/
Postman, N. (1986). Amusing ourselves to deathLinks to an external site.Links to an external site.Links to an external site.. Penguin Books. https://quote.ucsd.edu/childhood/files/2013/05/postman-amusing.